sapo/doc/SIL.md, before:

# SIL

Sapo Input Language (SIL) is a language designed to provide an input model for Sapo.
It consists in a list of statements, each belonging to one of the following categories:

- [Header](#header)
- [Symbol definitions](#symdef)
- [Directions and template](#matdef)
- [SAPO Options](#footer)



## <a name="header">Header
It consists in

### problem definition (required)

```C++
problem: reachability | synthesis;
```

This statement determines if sapo will compute the reachable sets or perform parameter synthesis.


### number of iterations (required)

```C++
iterations: <num>;
```

Determines how many reachable steps are performed.

### maximum number of parameter splits (optional)

```C++
max_parameter_splits: <num>;
```

When parameter synthesis returns an empty set, the result may be due to over-approximation. 
Since the approximation also directly depends on the size of the parameter set, in order to decrease it, 
the initial parameter set can be split in subsets and the computation can be repeated for each them.
The `max_parameter_splits` option declares the maximum number of splits that Sapo can perform 
searching for a non-empty set satisfying the specification.

### presplits for parameters (optional)

```C++
presplit_parameters: ON | OFF;
```

### bundle magnitude (optional)

```C++
max_bundle_magnitude: <num>;
```



## <a name="symdef">Symbol definitions

Statements of this kind are used to define the symbols of the model, like variables and parameters.
They can appear in any order, as long as each symbol is defined before is used.

### Variables
Variables can be defined with their initial value bounds. Multiple variables can be defined in the same statement. In this case, all variables get the same bounds.

```C++
var v1 in [a,b];
var v2, v3 in [c,d];
```
Otherwise, just the name is provided. Multiple variables can be defined in the same command.

```C++
var v1, v2;
```
Variable names follow the C++ rule for identifiers.

### Parameters

They follow the syntax of variable definition.

```C++
param p1, p2 in [0.01, 0.02];
```
```C++
param p1;
```

### Constants
They define a map between identifiers and numerical values.
The usual rules hold for constant names, and the corresponding expression must be numeric only.

```C++
const c1 = 1.2;
const c2 = 34 * 0.78;
const c3 = c1 + 2*c2;
```

### Definitions
They are used to name subexpressions wich occur in different places. They can contain variables, parameters, constants and other definitions.

```C++
define ex = v + c*p/2;
```

### Dynamics
They represent the evolution of variables with resect to time.

```C++
dynamic(v1) = v1 + p * (v2 - c + v3);
```
where

- `v1` is a name of an already defined variable
- all symbols occurring in the expression must be already defined
- the expression must be linear with regard to parameters
- the expression must be polynomial with respect to the variables

Each variable must have a corresponding dynamic defined.

### Specification
If problem is `synthesis`, a STL specification must be provided. If the problem is `reachability`, this statement is ignored.

+ An atomic formula is of the form
	
	```C++
	ex1 ~ ex2
	```
	where

	- `ex1` and `ex2` are expression involving numbers, variables and constants
	- `~` is one of `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=` or `=` 

+ Negation is written
	
	```C++
	! f
	```

+ Conjunction is written
	
	```C++
	f1 && f2
	```

+ Disjunction is written
	
	```C++
	f1 || f2
	```

+ Until is written
	
	```C++
	f1 U[a,b] f2
	```
	
	This formula holds at time `t` if there exists a time point `t'` in `[t+a, t+b]` such that `f2` hlds at time `t'` and `f1` hold in all time points from `t` to `t'`.

+ Eventually is written
	
	```C++
	F[a,b] f
	```
	
	This means that there exists a point in `[t+a, t+b]` where `f` holds.

+ Globally is written
	
	```C++
	G[a,b] f
	```
	
	This means that at all time points in '[t+a, t+b]` the formula `f` holds

Finally, the specification is provided as

```C++
spec: STLformula;
```

### Assumption
An assumption is a way to restrict valid states to those satisfying a given formula.
That is, during reachability steps, the states violating the assumptions are discarded.

```C++
assume x + y >= 0;
```

This must be an atomic formula which expression is linear in the variables and contains no parameters.
Multiple assumptions are treated like conjunctions.

Assumptions are currently supported only for `reachability`, not for `synthesis`.

### Expressions
Expressions are used to define constants, definitions and dynamics.
Legal operations are:

+ sum: ```v + 5```.
+ difference: ```3 - c1```.
+ product: ```alpha * x```.
+ division: ```x / 3```. Notice that the divisor must be a number or a numeric expression.
+ unary minus: ```-c```.
+ exponentiation: ```x^2```. Notice that the exponent must be an integer, or a numeric expression with integer value.

We have that `+`, `-`, `*` and `/` are left associative, while `^` is right associative.
`^` has precedence w.r.t. unary minus, which has precedence w.r.t `*` and `/`, which have precedence w.r.t. `+` and `-`.
Thus, the expression

```
-x^2 + y^3 * 4
```
is evaluated as

```
(-(x^2)) + ((y^3) * 4)
```

## <a name="matdef">Directions and template
These statements provide the definition of the polytopes used to approximate reachable sets and parameters.

### Directions of initial set
A valid direction is any expression which is linear w.r.t. variables and does not contain parameters.

```C++
direction v1 + 2*v2 - v3/2 in [a, b];
```
It is possible to define named directions

```C++
direction sum: v1 + v2 + v3 in [0,10];
```

It is also possible to define fixed directions

```C++
direction x + y - z = 0;
// this is equivalent to 
// direction x + y - z in [0, 0];
```

To the directions defined in this way we must add the implicit directions defined while declaring variables with bound. For example, the definition
`var x in [a, b];`
is equivalent to 

```C++
var x;
.
.
.
direction default_x: x in [a, b];
```

Notice that the implicit direction defined during variable declaration is always named `default_<var_name>`.

### Template for parallelotope bundle
In order to represent polytopes, Sapo uses parallelotope bundles. It is possible to define this bundle by explicitly giving a template matrix.

```C++
template = {
	{num_1, ..., num_n},
	{id_1, num_2, ..., id_n},
	.
	.
	.
	{num_1, ..., num_n}
}
```
Each row represent a parallelotope by referencing its directions.
This can be done giving the name, if provided in the definition, or by their number. In fact, each direction has an associated number depending on the order of definition (`0` the first, `1` the second and so on).

The user must pay attention in describing bounded parallelotopes.

If the template is not provided, then it is automatically generated.
If the template is partial, in that it does not contain all defined directions, a new template is computed that contains all parallelotopes explicitly defined.

### Directions for parameter set
The directions for parameter work in the same way as those for variables

```C++
parameter_direction p1 - p2 in [a, b];

parameter_direction d1: p1 + 4*p3 in [0,1];
```

Again, parameter directions can be implicitly defined in parameter declaration.
For example, `param p in [-1, 1];` is equivalent to

```C++
param p;
...
parameter_direction default_p: p in [-1, 1];
```

Polytopes are not supported for parameter sets, so there can be at most as many directions as the number of parameters (also counting the implicitly defined ones)


## <a name="footer">Options
These statements provide some options to tune the behavior of Sapo.
All of them are optional.

We can define
- how we compute the image of a polytope (optional)
	
	```option transformation AFO | OFO;```
	In general, `AFO` gives more accurate results but `OFO` is faster.
	The default value is ```AFO```.

- whether or not to perform an optional decomposition phase after computing set images.
	
	```option decomposition;```

- set a weigth `alpha` in `[0,1]` used in decomposition, to define the importance given to polytope volume over maximum side length in the cost function.
	
	``` option sapo_alpha num;```
	
	The default value is `0.5`.

## Comments
SIL understands C/C++ like comments, both sigle and multi-line

```C++
...
// single line comment
...
/*
multi
line
comment
*/
...
``` 

# Examples

### SIR
Here is a SIL input file for a SIR epidemic model

```C++
problem: reachability;

iterations: 10;
max_parameter_splits: 0;

var s in [0.2, 0.3];
var i in [0.001, 0.1];
var r in [0.7, 0.8];

param beta in [0.055, 0.1];
param mu in [0.00001, 0.001];
param gamma in [0.0027, 0.0055];
param alpha in [0.05, 0.07];

dynamic(s) = s - beta*s*i - mu*s + gamma*r;
dynamic(i) = i + beta*s*i - alpha*i;
dynamic(r) = r + mu*s - gamma*r + alpha*i;

spec: r > 0.4;

assume(s <= 1);
assume(i <= 1);
assume(r <= 1);

assume(s >= 0);
assume(i >= 0);
assume(r >= 0);


assume(s + i + r <= 1);
assume(s + i + r >= 0);

option transformation OFO;
```

### Van der Pol oscillator

```C++
problem: reachability;

iterations: 30;


var x in [0, 0.01];
var y in [1.99, 2];

dynamic(x) = x + (y)*0.02;
dynamic(y) = y + (0.5*(1-x^2)*y - x)*0.02;

direction diff: y - x in [-10, 10];
direction sum: x + y in [-10, 10];

template = {
	{default_x, default_y},
	{default_x, diff},
	{default_x, sum},
	{default_y, diff},
	{default_y, sum},
	{diff, sum}
}

```

Commit message:

Closed #15 - Bernstein coefficients are symbolically computed and cached by default - added a `sapo` option to revert to the on-the-fly computation - fomatted code - updated the SIL manual

sapo/doc/SIL.md, after:

# SIL

Sapo Input Language (SIL) is a language designed to provide an input model for Sapo.
It consists in a list of statements, each belonging to one of the following categories:

- [Header](#header)
- [Symbol definitions](#symdef)
- [Directions and template](#matdef)
- [SAPO Options](#footer)



## <a name="header">Header
It consists in

### problem definition (required)

```C++
problem: reachability | synthesis;
```

This statement determines if sapo will compute the reachable sets or perform parameter synthesis.


### number of iterations (required)

```C++
iterations: <num>;
```

Determines how many reachable steps are performed.

### maximum number of parameter splits (optional)

```C++
max_parameter_splits: <num>;
```

When parameter synthesis returns an empty set, the result may be due to over-approximation. 
Since the approximation also directly depends on the size of the parameter set, in order to decrease it, 
the initial parameter set can be split in subsets and the computation can be repeated for each them.
The `max_parameter_splits` option declares the maximum number of splits that Sapo can perform 
searching for a non-empty set satisfying the specification.

### presplits for parameters (optional)

```C++
presplit_parameters: ON | OFF;
```

### bundle magnitude (optional)

```C++
max_bundle_magnitude: <num>;
```



## <a name="symdef">Symbol definitions

Statements of this kind are used to define the symbols of the model, like variables and parameters.
They can appear in any order, as long as each symbol is defined before is used.

### Variables
Variables can be defined with their initial value bounds. Multiple variables can be defined in the same statement. In this case, all variables get the same bounds.

```C++
var v1 in [a,b];
var v2, v3 in [c,d];
```
Otherwise, just the name is provided. Multiple variables can be defined in the same command.

```C++
var v1, v2;
```
Variable names follow the C++ rule for identifiers.

### Parameters

They follow the syntax of variable definition.

```C++
param p1, p2 in [0.01, 0.02];
```
```C++
param p1;
```

### Constants
They define a map between identifiers and numerical values.
The usual rules hold for constant names, and the corresponding expression must be numeric only.

```C++
const c1 = 1.2;
const c2 = 34 * 0.78;
const c3 = c1 + 2*c2;
```

### Definitions
They are used to name subexpressions wich occur in different places. They can contain variables, parameters, constants and other definitions.

```C++
define ex = v + c*p/2;
```

### Dynamics
They represent the evolution of variables with resect to time.

```C++
dynamic(v1) = v1 + p * (v2 - c + v3);
```
where

- `v1` is a name of an already defined variable
- all symbols occurring in the expression must be already defined
- the expression must be linear with regard to parameters
- the expression must be polynomial with respect to the variables

Each variable must have a corresponding dynamic defined.

### Specification
If problem is `synthesis`, a STL specification must be provided. If the problem is `reachability`, this statement is ignored.

+ An atomic formula is of the form
	
	```C++
	ex1 ~ ex2
	```
	where

	- `ex1` and `ex2` are expression involving numbers, variables and constants
	- `~` is one of `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=` or `=` 

+ Negation is written
	
	```C++
	! f
	```

+ Conjunction is written
	
	```C++
	f1 && f2
	```

+ Disjunction is written
	
	```C++
	f1 || f2
	```

+ Until is written
	
	```C++
	f1 U[a,b] f2
	```
	
	This formula holds at time `t` if there exists a time point `t'` in `[t+a, t+b]` such that `f2` hlds at time `t'` and `f1` hold in all time points from `t` to `t'`.

+ Eventually is written
	
	```C++
	F[a,b] f
	```
	
	This means that there exists a point in `[t+a, t+b]` where `f` holds.

+ Globally is written
	
	```C++
	G[a,b] f
	```
	
	This means that at all time points in '[t+a, t+b]` the formula `f` holds

Finally, the specification is provided as

```C++
spec: STLformula;
```

### Assumption
An assumption is a way to restrict valid states to those satisfying a given formula.
That is, during reachability steps, the states violating the assumptions are discarded.

```C++
assume x + y >= 0;
```

This must be an atomic formula which expression is linear in the variables and contains no parameters.
Multiple assumptions are treated like conjunctions.

Assumptions are currently supported only for `reachability`, not for `synthesis`.

### Expressions
Expressions are used to define constants, definitions and dynamics.
Legal operations are:

+ sum: ```v + 5```.
+ difference: ```3 - c1```.
+ product: ```alpha * x```.
+ division: ```x / 3```. Notice that the divisor must be a number or a numeric expression.
+ unary minus: ```-c```.
+ exponentiation: ```x^2```. Notice that the exponent must be an integer, or a numeric expression with integer value.

We have that `+`, `-`, `*` and `/` are left associative, while `^` is right associative.
`^` has precedence w.r.t. unary minus, which has precedence w.r.t `*` and `/`, which have precedence w.r.t. `+` and `-`.
Thus, the expression

```
-x^2 + y^3 * 4
```
is evaluated as

```
(-(x^2)) + ((y^3) * 4)
```

## <a name="matdef">Directions and template
These statements provide the definition of the polytopes used to approximate reachable sets and parameters.

### Directions of initial set
A valid direction is any expression which is linear w.r.t. variables and does not contain parameters.

```C++
direction v1 + 2*v2 - v3/2 in [a, b];
```
It is possible to define named directions

```C++
direction sum: v1 + v2 + v3 in [0,10];
```

It is also possible to define fixed directions

```C++
direction x + y - z = 0;
// this is equivalent to 
// direction x + y - z in [0, 0];
```

To the directions defined in this way we must add the implicit directions defined while declaring variables with bound. For example, the definition
`var x in [a, b];`
is equivalent to 

```C++
var x;
.
.
.
direction default_x: x in [a, b];
```

Notice that the implicit direction defined during variable declaration is always named `default_<var_name>`.

### Template for parallelotope bundle
In order to represent polytopes, Sapo uses parallelotope bundles. It is possible to define this bundle by explicitly giving a template matrix.

```C++
template = {
	{num_1, ..., num_n},
	{id_1, num_2, ..., id_n},
	.
	.
	.
	{num_1, ..., num_n}
}
```
Each row represent a parallelotope by referencing its directions.
This can be done giving the name, if provided in the definition, or by their number. In fact, each direction has an associated number depending on the order of definition (`0` the first, `1` the second and so on).

The user must pay attention in describing bounded parallelotopes.

If the template is not provided, then it is automatically generated.
If the template is partial, in that it does not contain all defined directions, a new template is computed that contains all parallelotopes explicitly defined.

### Directions for parameter set
The directions for parameter work in the same way as those for variables

```C++
parameter_direction p1 - p2 in [a, b];

parameter_direction d1: p1 + 4*p3 in [0,1];
```

Again, parameter directions can be implicitly defined in parameter declaration.
For example, `param p in [-1, 1];` is equivalent to

```C++
param p;
...
parameter_direction default_p: p in [-1, 1];
```

Polytopes are not supported for parameter sets, so there can be at most as many directions as the number of parameters (also counting the implicitly defined ones)


## <a name="footer">Options
These statements provide some options to tune the behavior of Sapo.
All of them are optional.

We can define
- how we compute the image of a polytope (optional)
	
	```option transformation [AFO | OFO];```
	In general, `AFO` gives more accurate results but `OFO` is faster.
	The default value is ```AFO```.

- whether or not to perform an optional decomposition phase after computing set images.
	
	```option decomposition;```

- set a weigth `alpha` in `[0,1]` used in decomposition, to define the importance given to polytope volume over maximum side length in the cost function.
	
	```option sapo_alpha num;```
	
	The default value is `0.5`.

- set an approximation technique for set join in `k`-induction invariant proof.

	```option k_induction_join [listing|packaging|merging];```

	The default value is `listing`.

- avoid Bernstein coefficients caching during computation. If this option is selected, Bernstein coefficients are numerically evaluated on-the-fly at 
each epoch instead of being symbollically computed for a generic parallotope with specific generators and cached once and then recovered 
and instanciated when needed. The default behaviour is more convenient when the time overhead due to the symbolic computation is balanced by 
the savings due to using the same coefficients for many evolution epochs. 

	```option no_caching;``` 

## Comments
SIL understands C/C++ like comments, both sigle and multi-line

```C++
...
// single line comment
...
/*
multi
line
comment
*/
...
``` 

# Examples

### SIR
Here is a SIL input file for a SIR epidemic model

```C++
problem: reachability;

iterations: 10;
max_parameter_splits: 0;

var s in [0.2, 0.3];
var i in [0.001, 0.1];
var r in [0.7, 0.8];

param beta in [0.055, 0.1];
param mu in [0.00001, 0.001];
param gamma in [0.0027, 0.0055];
param alpha in [0.05, 0.07];

dynamic(s) = s - beta*s*i - mu*s + gamma*r;
dynamic(i) = i + beta*s*i - alpha*i;
dynamic(r) = r + mu*s - gamma*r + alpha*i;

spec: r > 0.4;

assume(s <= 1);
assume(i <= 1);
assume(r <= 1);

assume(s >= 0);
assume(i >= 0);
assume(r >= 0);


assume(s + i + r <= 1);
assume(s + i + r >= 0);

option transformation OFO;
```

### Van der Pol oscillator

```C++
problem: reachability;

iterations: 30;


var x in [0, 0.01];
var y in [1.99, 2];

dynamic(x) = x + (y)*0.02;
dynamic(y) = y + (0.5*(1-x^2)*y - x)*0.02;

direction diff: y - x in [-10, 10];
direction sum: x + y in [-10, 10];

template = {
	{default_x, default_y},
	{default_x, diff},
	{default_x, sum},
	{default_y, diff},
	{default_y, sum},
	{diff, sum}
}

```
